.TH FLUXLAND-INIT 5 "2026-03-03" "fluxland 1.1.0" "File Formats Manual"
.SH NAME
fluxland-init \- main configuration file for fluxland
.SH DESCRIPTION
The init file is the main configuration file for
.BR fluxland (1).
It uses X resource database syntax (key: value) to control workspaces,
focus policy, window placement, toolbar behavior, keyboard layout, and
paths to other configuration files.
.PP
By default, the file is located at
.I ~/.config/fluxland/init
within the configuration directory.
Boolean values accept
.BR true / false ,
.BR yes / no ,
or
.BR 1 / 0 .
.SH SYNTAX
Each line has the form:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
\fIkey\fP: \fIvalue\fP
.fi
.RE
.PP
Blank lines and lines beginning with
.B #
or
.B !
are comments.
.SH WORKSPACE SETTINGS
.TP
.B session.screen0.workspaces
Number of workspaces (1\-32, default: 4).
.TP
.B session.screen0.workspaceNames
Comma-separated workspace names (e.g.\&
.IR Web,Code,Term,Chat ).
.TP
.B session.screen0.workspacewarping
Allow moving windows between workspaces by dragging to screen edges
(default: true).
.TP
.B session.screen0.workspaceMode
Workspace mode:
.BR global " (default)"
or
.BR per-output .
.SH FOCUS SETTINGS
.TP
.B session.screen0.focusModel
Focus policy.
One of
.BR ClickToFocus " (default),"
.BR MouseFocus " (sloppy),"
or
.BR StrictMouseFocus .
.TP
.B session.screen0.autoRaise
Automatically raise windows on focus (default: false).
.TP
.B session.autoRaiseDelay
Delay in milliseconds before auto-raising (default: 250).
.TP
.B session.screen0.clickRaises
Clicking a window raises it (default: true).
.TP
.B session.screen0.focusNewWindows
New windows receive focus (default: true).
.SH WINDOW BEHAVIOR
.TP
.B session.screen0.opaqueMove
Show window contents while moving (default: true).
.TP
.B session.screen0.opaqueResize
Show window contents while resizing (default: false).
.TP
.B session.screen0.edgeSnapThreshold
Pixel distance for edge snapping (default: 10).
.TP
.B session.screen0.windowPlacement
Window placement algorithm.
One of
.BR RowSmartPlacement " (default),"
.BR ColSmartPlacement ,
.BR CascadePlacement ,
.BR UnderMousePlacement ,
.BR RowMinOverlapPlacement ,
or
.BR ColMinOverlapPlacement .
.TP
.B session.screen0.rowPlacementDirection
Direction for row placement.
One of
.BR LeftToRight " (default)"
or
.BR RightToLeft .
.TP
.B session.screen0.colPlacementDirection
Direction for column placement.
One of
.BR TopToBottom " (default)"
or
.BR BottomToTop .
.TP
.B session.screen0.fullMaximization
Maximize windows over the toolbar and slit (default: false).
.TP
.B session.screen0.showWindowPosition
Show window position overlay during move/resize (default: false).
.TP
.B session.screen0.defaultDeco
Default decoration preset for new windows (e.g.\&
.BR NORMAL ,
.BR NONE ,
.BR BORDER ).
.TP
.B session.screen0.struts
Manual struts as four space-separated integers:
.IR "left right top bottom" .
Reserves screen edges from window placement.
.SH WINDOW OPACITY
.TP
.B session.screen0.window.focus.alpha
Opacity for focused windows (0\-255, default: 255).
.TP
.B session.screen0.window.unfocus.alpha
Opacity for unfocused windows (0\-255, default: 255).
.SH WINDOW ANIMATIONS
.TP
.B session.screen0.animateWindowMap
Fade-in animation when windows appear (default: false).
.TP
.B session.screen0.animateWindowUnmap
Fade-out animation when windows close (default: false).
.TP
.B session.screen0.animateMinimize
Animate minimize/restore (default: false).
.TP
.B session.screen0.animationDuration
Animation duration in milliseconds (0\-5000, default: 300).
.SH WINDOW SNAP ZONES
.TP
.B session.screen0.enableWindowSnapping
Enable edge/corner snap zones for tiling (default: false).
.TP
.B session.screen0.snapZoneThreshold
Pixel distance from screen edge to trigger snap zones (1\-100, default: 10).
.TP
.B session.screen0.edgeResizeSnapThreshold
Pixel distance for edge resize snapping (default: 0, disabled).
.SH TOOLBAR SETTINGS
.TP
.B session.screen0.toolbar.visible
Show the toolbar (default: true).
.TP
.B session.screen0.toolbar.placement
Toolbar position.
One of
.BR TopLeft ,
.BR TopCenter ,
.BR TopRight ,
.BR BottomLeft ,
.BR BottomCenter " (default),"
or
.BR BottomRight .
.TP
.B session.screen0.toolbar.autoHide
Auto-hide the toolbar (default: false).
.TP
.B session.screen0.toolbar.autoHideDelay
Delay in milliseconds before hiding (default: 500).
.TP
.B session.screen0.toolbar.widthPercent
Toolbar width as percentage of screen (10\-100, default: 100).
.TP
.B session.screen0.toolbar.height
Toolbar height in pixels (0 = auto from font, default: 0).
.TP
.B session.screen0.toolbar.layer
Toolbar stacking layer (default: 4, Dock).
.TP
.B session.screen0.toolbar.alpha
Toolbar opacity (0\-255, default: 255).
.TP
.B session.screen0.toolbar.onhead
Monitor number for toolbar placement (default: 0).
.TP
.B session.screen0.toolbar.tools
Space-separated list of toolbar components (default:
.IR "prevworkspace workspacename nextworkspace iconbar clock" ).
.TP
.B session.screen0.toolbar.maxOver
Allow maximized windows to cover the toolbar (default: false).
.SH TITLEBAR SETTINGS
.TP
.B session.titlebar.left
Space-separated list of buttons for the left side of the titlebar
(default:
.IR Stick ).
.TP
.B session.titlebar.right
Space-separated list of buttons for the right side of the titlebar
(default:
.IR "Shade Minimize Maximize Close" ).
.SH CLOCK SETTINGS
.TP
.B session.screen0.strftimeFormat
Clock format string using
.BR strftime (3)
syntax (default:
.IR %H:%M ).
.SH ICONBAR SETTINGS
.TP
.B session.screen0.iconbar.mode
Iconbar display mode.
One of
.BR Workspace " (default, show current workspace windows),"
.BR AllWindows ,
.BR Icons " (minimized only),"
.BR NoIcons " (exclude minimized),"
or
.BR WorkspaceIcons .
.TP
.B session.screen0.iconbar.alignment
Text alignment in iconbar entries:
.BR Left ,
.BR Center " (default),"
or
.BR Right .
.TP
.B session.screen0.iconbar.iconWidth
Fixed width for iconbar entries in pixels (0 = auto, default: 0).
.TP
.B session.screen0.iconbar.usePixmap
Use pixmap textures for iconbar entries (default: true).
.TP
.B session.screen0.iconbar.wheelMode
Mouse wheel behavior on iconbar:
.BR Screen " (default, switch workspaces)"
or
.BR Off .
.TP
.B session.screen0.iconbar.iconifiedPattern
Display pattern for minimized window names in the iconbar.
.SH TAB SETTINGS
.TP
.B session.screen0.autoTabPlacement
Automatically group new windows into tabs (default: false).
.TP
.B session.screen0.tabFocusModel
Tab focus model:
.BR ClickTabFocus " (default)"
or
.BR MouseTabFocus .
.TP
.B session.screen0.tabs.intitlebar
Display tabs in the titlebar (default: true).
.TP
.B session.screen0.tab.placement
External tab bar position when not in titlebar:
.BR Top " (default),"
.BR Bottom ,
.BR Left ,
or
.BR Right .
.TP
.B session.screen0.tab.width
External tab width in pixels (0 = auto from font, default: 0).
.TP
.B session.screen0.tabPadding
Padding between tabs in pixels (default: 0).
.SH SLIT SETTINGS
.TP
.B session.screen0.slit.autoHide
Auto-hide the slit (default: false).
.TP
.B session.screen0.slit.placement
Slit position.
One of
.BR TopLeft ,
.BR TopCenter ,
.BR TopRight ,
.BR RightTop ,
.BR RightCenter " (default),"
.BR RightBottom ,
.BR BottomLeft ,
.BR BottomCenter ,
.BR BottomRight ,
.BR LeftTop ,
.BR LeftCenter ,
or
.BR LeftBottom .
.TP
.B session.screen0.slit.direction
Slit layout direction:
.BR Vertical " (default)"
or
.BR Horizontal .
.TP
.B session.screen0.slit.layer
Slit stacking layer:
.BR Bottom ,
.BR Normal ,
.BR Dock " (default),"
.BR Above ,
or
.BR AboveDock .
.TP
.B session.screen0.slit.onhead
Monitor number for slit placement (default: 0).
.TP
.B session.screen0.slit.alpha
Slit opacity (0\-255, default: 255).
.TP
.B session.screen0.slit.maxOver
Allow maximized windows to cover the slit (default: false).
.TP
.B session.slitlistFile
Path to the slit client ordering file.
.SH MENU SETTINGS
.TP
.B session.screen0.menu.alpha
Menu opacity (0\-255, default: 255).
.TP
.B session.menuSearch
Menu type-ahead search mode:
.BR Nowhere " (default, disabled),"
.BR ItemStart " (match item prefix),"
or
.BR Somewhere " (match anywhere in item)."
.TP
.B session.screen0.menuDelay
Submenu hover-open delay in milliseconds (0\-5000, default: 200).
.TP
.B session.screen0.windowMenu
Path to a custom window context menu file.
.SH TOUCHPAD GESTURES
.TP
.B session.screen0.gestureWorkspaceSwitch
Enable three-finger swipe to switch workspaces. Default: true.
.TP
.B session.screen0.gestureOverview
Enable vertical swipe up to show window list. Default: false.
.TP
.B session.screen0.gestureWorkspaceFingers
Number of fingers required for workspace gestures (2\-5). Default: 3.
.TP
.B session.screen0.gestureSwipeThreshold
Pixel distance to trigger a swipe action (10\-1000). Default: 100.
.SH MISCELLANEOUS
.TP
.B session.doubleClickInterval
Double-click interval in milliseconds (50\-2000, default: 300).
.TP
.B session.screen0.rootCommand
Shell command to execute on startup (e.g.\& to set a wallpaper).
.SH MOUSE BUTTON REMAPPING
.TP
.B session.mouse.button1.map
Remap mouse button 1.
Value is one of
.BR BTN_LEFT ,
.BR BTN_MIDDLE ,
.BR BTN_RIGHT ,
.BR BTN_SIDE ,
or
.BR BTN_EXTRA .
.TP
.B session.mouse.button2.map
Remap mouse button 2.
.TP
.B session.mouse.button3.map
Remap mouse button 3.
.TP
.B session.mouse.button4.map
Remap mouse button 4.
.TP
.B session.mouse.button5.map
Remap mouse button 5.
.SH XKB KEYBOARD LAYOUT
.TP
.B session.xkb.rules
XKB rules (e.g.\&
.IR evdev ).
.TP
.B session.xkb.model
Keyboard model (e.g.\&
.IR pc105 ).
.TP
.B session.xkb.layout
Keyboard layout, comma-separated for multiple layouts (e.g.\&
.IR us,de ).
.TP
.B session.xkb.variant
Layout variant (e.g.\&
.IR ,nodeadkeys ).
.TP
.B session.xkb.options
XKB options (e.g.\&
.IR grp:alt_shift_toggle,caps:escape ).
.SH FILE PATHS
These override the default locations of other configuration files.
Absolute paths, tilde-expanded paths, and relative paths (resolved from
the config directory) are supported.
.TP
.B session.keyFile
Path to key bindings file (default:
.IR keys ).
.TP
.B session.appsFile
Path to window rules file (default:
.IR apps ).
.TP
.B session.menuFile
Path to menu file (default:
.IR menu ).
.TP
.B session.styleFile
Path to style file (default:
.IR styles/default ).
.TP
.B session.styleOverlay
Path to a style overlay file applied on top of the main style.
.SH EXAMPLES
Minimal init file:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
session.screen0.workspaces: 4
session.screen0.focusModel: ClickToFocus
session.screen0.toolbar.placement: BottomCenter
.fi
.RE
.PP
Power user configuration:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
session.screen0.workspaces: 6
session.screen0.workspaceNames: Web,Code,Term,Chat,Media,Misc
session.screen0.focusModel: MouseFocus
session.screen0.autoRaise: true
session.autoRaiseDelay: 200
session.screen0.edgeSnapThreshold: 15
session.screen0.windowPlacement: RowSmartPlacement

session.screen0.toolbar.placement: BottomCenter
session.screen0.toolbar.widthPercent: 80
session.screen0.toolbar.autoHide: true
session.screen0.toolbar.alpha: 230

session.screen0.enableWindowSnapping: true
session.screen0.snapZoneThreshold: 20

session.screen0.animateWindowMap: true
session.screen0.animateWindowUnmap: true
session.screen0.animationDuration: 200

session.screen0.window.focus.alpha: 255
session.screen0.window.unfocus.alpha: 200

session.screen0.strftimeFormat: %a %H:%M
session.xkb.layout: us,de
session.xkb.options: grp:alt_shift_toggle,caps:escape
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fluxland (1),
.BR fluxland-keys (5),
.BR fluxland-apps (5),
.BR fluxland-style (5),
.BR fluxland-menu (5),
.BR fluxland-startup (5)
