.TH FLUXLAND-MENU 5 "2026-03-03" "fluxland 1.1.0" "File Formats Manual"
.SH NAME
fluxland-menu \- menu configuration for fluxland
.SH DESCRIPTION
The menu file defines the root menu shown by the
.B RootMenu
action in
.BR fluxland (1).
The format is compatible with the Fluxbox menu file format.
.PP
By default, the file is located at
.I ~/.config/fluxland/menu
but the path can be overridden in the init file via
.BR session.menuFile .
.SH SYNTAX
The menu file is a series of tagged entries enclosed by
.B [begin]
and
.BR [end] .
Blank lines and lines beginning with
.B #
are ignored.
.PP
Tags use square brackets.
Arguments are enclosed in parentheses for labels, braces for
commands/paths, and angle brackets for optional icons:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
[\fItag\fP] (\fIlabel\fP) {\fIcommand\fP} <\fIicon\fP>
.fi
.RE
.SH TAGS
.TP
.BI [begin] " (" title )
Start of the root menu.
The
.I title
is displayed at the top of the menu.
.TP
.B [end]
End of the current menu or submenu block.
.TP
.BI [exec] " (" label ") {" command "}" " [<" icon ">]"
Execute
.I command
via
.BR /bin/sh .
.TP
.BI [submenu] " (" label ") [{" title "}] [<" icon ">]"
Open a submenu.
The optional
.I title
in braces is displayed as the submenu's title bar.
The submenu body follows, terminated by
.BR [end] .
.TP
.B [separator]
Draw a horizontal separator line.
.TP
.BI [nop] " (" label )
A disabled (greyed-out) label item.
.TP
.BI [style] " (" label ") {" path "}"
Load the style file at
.IR path .
.TP
.BI [stylesdir] " (" directory )
Scan
.I directory
for style files and create a menu entry for each one.
Tilde expansion is supported.
.TP
.BI [include] " (" path )
Include another menu file at
.IR path .
Tilde expansion is supported.
.TP
.BI [workspaces] " (" label )
Insert a workspace list submenu.
.TP
.BI [config] " (" label )
Insert a configuration submenu.
.TP
.BI [reconfig] " (" label )
Reload configuration files.
.TP
.BI [restart] " (" label ") [{" command "}]"
Restart the compositor, optionally executing
.I command
instead.
.TP
.BI [exit] " (" label )
Exit the compositor.
.TP
.BI [command] " (" label ") {" action }
Execute a compositor action (same actions as in the keys file).
.SS Window Menu Tags
These tags are used in the built-in window context menu:
.TP
.BI [shade] " (" label )
Toggle window shade.
.TP
.BI [stick] " (" label )
Toggle sticky.
.TP
.BI [maximize] " (" label )
Toggle maximize.
.TP
.BI [iconify] " (" label )
Minimize window.
.TP
.BI [close] " (" label )
Close window.
.TP
.BI [kill] " (" label )
Kill the window's client.
.TP
.BI [raise] " (" label )
Raise window.
.TP
.BI [lower] " (" label )
Lower window.
.TP
.BI [sendto] " (" label )
Insert a "Send to workspace" submenu.
.TP
.BI [layer] " (" label )
Insert a stacking layer submenu.
.SH MENU NAVIGATION
When a menu is open, the following keys navigate it:
.TP
.BR Up ", " k
Move selection up.
.TP
.BR Down ", " j
Move selection down.
.TP
.BR Right ", " l
Enter submenu.
.TP
.BR Left ", " h
Go back to parent menu.
.TP
.BR Return ", " Enter
Activate selected item or enter submenu.
.TP
.B Escape
Close current submenu, or close all menus if at the root.
.PP
Mouse interaction: hover to select, click to activate, click outside to
close.
Hovering over a submenu item automatically opens it.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
[begin] (fluxland)
  [exec] (Terminal) {foot}
  [exec] (File Manager) {thunar}
  [exec] (Web Browser) {firefox}
  [separator]
  [submenu] (Editors)
    [exec] (Vim) {foot vim}
    [exec] (VS Code) {code}
  [end]
  [submenu] (Styles)
    [stylesdir] (~/.config/fluxland/styles)
  [end]
  [workspaces] (Workspaces)
  [separator]
  [config] (Configuration)
  [reconfig] (Reload Config)
  [restart] (Restart)
  [exit] (Exit)
[end]
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fluxland (1),
.BR fluxland-keys (5),
.BR fluxland-apps (5),
.BR fluxland-style (5)
