.TH FLUXLAND 1 "2026-02-27" "fluxland 1.0.0" "General Commands Manual"
.SH NAME
fluxland \- a Fluxbox-inspired Wayland compositor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fluxland
.RB [ \-s
.IR command ]
.RB [ \-d ]
.RB [ \-v ]
.RB [ \-h ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B fluxland
is a Wayland compositor built on wlroots that provides a traditional
stacking window management experience inspired by Fluxbox.
It features tabbed windows, configurable key bindings with chains and
keymodes, per-window rules, Fluxbox-compatible style themes, a toolbar
with workspace switching and window list, a root menu, and slit
support.
.PP
Configuration uses Fluxbox-compatible file formats: X resource database
syntax for the init and style files, and the Fluxbox keys/apps/menu
formats for key bindings, window rules, and menus respectively.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-s " command" "\fR,\fP \-\-startup " command
Run
.I command
via
.B /bin/sh
after the compositor starts and the Wayland socket is available.
This is in addition to the
.I startup
script in the configuration directory.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-debug
Enable debug logging.
Without this flag, only error-level messages are printed.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Print the version string and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a brief usage summary and exit.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B WAYLAND_DISPLAY
Set by the compositor to the name of the Wayland socket (e.g.\&
.IR wayland-0 ).
Child processes inherit this variable.
.TP
.B XDG_RUNTIME_DIR
Must be set before starting the compositor.
The Wayland socket is created in this directory.
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
If set, configuration files are searched for in
.IR $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/fluxland/ .
.TP
.B FLUXLAND_CONFIG_DIR
If set, overrides all other configuration directory search paths.
.TP
.B HOME
Used as a fallback to locate
.IR ~/.config/fluxland/ .
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGHUP
Reload configuration.
The init file, key bindings, mouse bindings, and style are
re-read from disk.
This is equivalent to the
.B Reconfigure
action.
.TP
.B SIGTERM\fR, \fBSIGINT
Terminate the compositor gracefully.
.SH FILES
Configuration files are searched in the following order:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
$FLUXLAND_CONFIG_DIR/
$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/fluxland/
~/.config/fluxland/
~/.fluxbox/     (Fluxbox compatibility fallback)
.fi
.RE
.PP
Within the configuration directory, the following files are used:
.TP
.B init
Main configuration file using X resource database syntax.
Controls workspaces, focus policy, placement, toolbar, XKB keyboard
layout, and paths to other configuration files.
See
.BR fluxland-init (5).
.TP
.B keys
Key binding definitions.
See
.BR fluxland-keys (5).
.TP
.B apps
Per-window rules for automatic placement, decoration, and tab grouping.
See
.BR fluxland-apps (5).
.TP
.B menu
Root menu definition.
See
.BR fluxland-menu (5).
.TP
.B styles/default
Default style/theme file.
See
.BR fluxland-style (5).
.TP
.B startup
Shell script executed on compositor startup.
If the file is executable, it is run directly; otherwise it is sourced
by
.BR /bin/sh .
The
.B WAYLAND_DISPLAY
environment variable is set before the script runs.
See
.BR fluxland-startup (5).
.SH EMERGENCY KEYBINDINGS
The following keybindings are always active, regardless of key binding
configuration, keymodes, or keyboard shortcut inhibition:
.TP
.B Ctrl+Alt+F1\fR\-\fBF12
Switch virtual terminal (VT).
.TP
.B Mod4+Shift+E
Exit the compositor.
.SH INIT FILE FORMAT
The init file uses X resource database syntax (key: value), with
session-scoped keys.
Boolean values are
.BR true / false .
.PP
.B Workspace settings:
.TP
.B session.screen0.workspaces
Number of workspaces (1\-32, default: 4).
.TP
.B session.screen0.workspaceNames
Comma-separated workspace names.
.TP
.B session.screen0.workspacewarping
Allow moving windows between workspaces by dragging to screen edges
(default: true).
.PP
.B Focus settings:
.TP
.B session.screen0.focusModel
One of
.BR ClickToFocus " (default),"
.BR MouseFocus " (sloppy),"
or
.BR StrictMouseFocus .
.TP
.B session.screen0.autoRaise
Automatically raise windows on focus (default: false).
.TP
.B session.autoRaiseDelay
Delay in milliseconds before auto-raising (default: 250).
.TP
.B session.screen0.clickRaises
Clicking a window raises it (default: true).
.TP
.B session.screen0.focusNewWindows
New windows receive focus (default: true).
.PP
.B Window behavior:
.TP
.B session.screen0.opaqueMove
Show window contents while moving (default: true).
.TP
.B session.screen0.opaqueResize
Show window contents while resizing (default: false).
.TP
.B session.screen0.edgeSnapThreshold
Pixel distance for edge snapping (default: 10).
.TP
.B session.screen0.windowPlacement
One of
.BR RowSmartPlacement " (default),"
.BR ColSmartPlacement ,
.BR CascadePlacement ,
or
.BR UnderMousePlacement .
.PP
.B Toolbar settings:
.TP
.B session.screen0.toolbar.visible
Show the toolbar (default: true).
.TP
.B session.screen0.toolbar.placement
One of
.BR TopLeft ,
.BR TopCenter ,
.BR TopRight ,
.BR BottomLeft ,
.BR BottomCenter " (default),"
or
.BR BottomRight .
.TP
.B session.screen0.toolbar.autoHide
Auto-hide the toolbar (default: false).
.TP
.B session.screen0.toolbar.autoHideDelay
Delay in milliseconds before hiding (default: 500).
.TP
.B session.screen0.toolbar.widthPercent
Toolbar width as percentage of screen (10\-100, default: 100).
.PP
.B XKB keyboard layout:
.TP
.B session.xkb.rules
XKB rules (e.g.\&
.IR evdev ).
.TP
.B session.xkb.model
Keyboard model (e.g.\&
.IR pc105 ).
.TP
.B session.xkb.layout
Keyboard layout, comma-separated for multiple layouts (e.g.\&
.IR us,de ).
.TP
.B session.xkb.variant
Layout variant (e.g.\&
.IR ,nodeadkeys ).
.TP
.B session.xkb.options
XKB options (e.g.\&
.IR grp:alt_shift_toggle,caps:escape ).
.PP
.B File paths:
.TP
.B session.keyFile
Path to key bindings file.
.TP
.B session.appsFile
Path to window rules file.
.TP
.B session.menuFile
Path to menu file.
.TP
.B session.styleFile
Path to style/theme file.
.SH EXAMPLES
Start the compositor with a terminal on startup:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
fluxland \-s foot
.fi
.RE
.PP
Start with debug logging:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
fluxland \-d
.fi
.RE
.PP
Example init file:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
session.screen0.workspaces: 6
session.screen0.workspaceNames: Web,Code,Term,Chat,Media,Misc
session.screen0.focusModel: MouseFocus
session.screen0.edgeSnapThreshold: 15
session.screen0.toolbar.placement: BottomCenter
session.xkb.layout: us,de
session.xkb.options: grp:alt_shift_toggle,caps:escape
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fluxland-ctl (1),
.BR fluxland-keys (5),
.BR fluxland-apps (5),
.BR fluxland-init (5),
.BR fluxland-menu (5),
.BR fluxland-startup (5),
.BR fluxland-style (5)
.SH AUTHORS
The fluxland project.
