.TH FLUXLAND-KEYS 5 "2026-02-27" "fluxland 1.0.0" "File Formats Manual"
.SH NAME
fluxland-keys \- key binding configuration for fluxland
.SH DESCRIPTION
The keys file defines keyboard and mouse bindings for
.BR fluxland (1).
The format is compatible with the Fluxbox keys file format.
.PP
By default, the file is located at
.I ~/.config/fluxland/keys
but the path can be overridden in the init file via
.BR session.keyFile .
.SH SYNTAX
Each line defines one binding.
Blank lines and lines beginning with
.B #
or
.B !
are ignored.
.PP
The general format is:
.PP
.RS 4
.RI [ Modifier " ...] " keyname " :" Action " [" argument ]
.RE
.PP
The colon before the action name is required.
.SH MODIFIERS
The following modifier names are recognized (case-insensitive):
.TP
.B Mod1
Alt key.
.TP
.B Mod4
Super (Logo/Windows) key.
.TP
.B Control\fR, \fBCtrl
Control key.
.TP
.B Shift
Shift key.
.TP
.B None
No modifiers.
Use this to bind an unmodified key.
.PP
Multiple modifiers can be combined by listing them separated by spaces:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
Mod4 Shift q :Close
Control Mod1 t :Exec foot
.fi
.RE
.SH KEY NAMES
Key names follow the XKB naming convention as used by
.BR xkbcommon .
Common examples:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
Return, space, Tab, Escape, BackSpace, Delete
a\-z, 0\-9
F1\-F12
Left, Right, Up, Down
Home, End, Page_Up, Page_Down
bracketleft, bracketright, minus, equal, slash
.fi
.RE
.PP
Key names are case-insensitive.
.SH KEY CHAINS
Multiple key segments can be listed before the action to create a
chained (multi-key) binding.
The user presses each key combination in sequence:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
Mod4 x Mod4 t :Exec foot
Mod4 x Mod4 f :Exec firefox
.fi
.RE
.PP
After pressing
.BR Mod4+x ,
the compositor waits up to 3 seconds for the next key in the chain.
Pressing
.B Escape
aborts the chain.
If no matching continuation is found, the chain is also aborted.
.SH KEYMODES
A keymode is a named set of bindings that replaces the default bindings
when activated.
The default mode is called
.BR default .
.PP
Keymode bindings are prefixed with the mode name followed by a colon:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
moving: h :MoveLeft 10
moving: l :MoveRight 10
moving: j :MoveDown 10
moving: k :MoveUp 10
moving: Escape :KeyMode default
Mod4 v :KeyMode moving Escape
.fi
.RE
.PP
In this example, pressing
.B Mod4+v
enters the
.I moving
mode, where
.BR h / j / k / l
move the focused window.
Pressing
.B Escape
returns to the default mode.
.SH ACTIONS
.SS Window Management
.TP
.B Close
Send a close request to the focused window.
.TP
.B Kill\fR, \fBKillWindow
Forcefully kill the focused window's process (SIGKILL).
.TP
.B Maximize
Toggle maximize state.
.TP
.B MaximizeVertical
Toggle vertical maximize.
.TP
.B MaximizeHorizontal
Toggle horizontal maximize.
.TP
.B Fullscreen
Toggle fullscreen state.
.TP
.B Minimize\fR, \fBIconify
Minimize (iconify) the focused window.
.TP
.B Deiconify
Restore the last minimized window.
.TP
.B Shade\fR, \fBShadeWindow
Toggle window shade (collapse to title bar).
.TP
.B ShadeOn
Shade the focused window.
.TP
.B ShadeOff
Unshade the focused window.
.TP
.B Stick\fR, \fBStickWindow
Toggle sticky state (visible on all workspaces).
.TP
.B ToggleDecor
Toggle window decorations on/off.
.TP
.BI SetDecor " preset"
Set decoration preset.
.I preset
is one of
.BR NORMAL ,
.BR NONE ,
.BR BORDER ,
.BR TAB ,
.BR TINY ,
or
.BR TOOL .
.SS Window Movement and Resizing
.TP
.B Move
Begin interactive (mouse) move of the focused window.
.TP
.B Resize
Begin interactive (mouse) resize of the focused window.
.TP
.B StartMoving
Begin interactive move (used in mouse bindings).
.TP
.BI StartResizing " [edge]"
Begin interactive resize (used in mouse bindings).
.TP
.BI MoveLeft " pixels"
Move the focused window left by
.I pixels
pixels.
.TP
.BI MoveRight " pixels"
Move right.
.TP
.BI MoveUp " pixels"
Move up.
.TP
.BI MoveDown " pixels"
Move down.
.TP
.BI MoveTo " x y"
Move to absolute position
.RI ( x ", " y ).
.TP
.BI ResizeTo " width height"
Resize to the given dimensions.
.SS Focus and Stacking
.TP
.B NextWindow
Focus the next window in the stacking order.
.TP
.B PrevWindow
Focus the previous window.
.TP
.B FocusNext
Focus the next window (same as NextWindow).
.TP
.B FocusPrev
Focus the previous window (same as PrevWindow).
.TP
.B Focus
Explicitly focus the window under the cursor (mouse bindings).
.TP
.B Raise
Raise the focused window to the top.
.TP
.B Lower
Lower the focused window to the bottom.
.TP
.B RaiseLayer
Move the focused window up one stacking layer.
.TP
.B LowerLayer
Move down one layer.
.TP
.BI SetLayer " layer"
Set the stacking layer explicitly.
.I layer
is one of
.BR Desktop ,
.BR Below " (or " Bottom ),
.BR Normal ,
or
.BR Above " (or " Top ", " Dock ", " AboveDock ).
.SS Window Arrangement
.TP
.B ArrangeWindows
Tile all windows on the current workspace in a grid layout.
.TP
.B ArrangeWindowsVertical
Tile windows in vertical columns.
.TP
.B ArrangeWindowsHorizontal
Tile windows in horizontal rows.
.TP
.B CascadeWindows
Cascade windows from the top-left corner.
.SS Workspace Actions
.TP
.BI Workspace " N"
Switch to workspace
.I N
(1-based).
.TP
.BI SendToWorkspace " N"
Send the focused window to workspace
.I N
(1-based).
.TP
.B NextWorkspace
Switch to the next workspace.
.TP
.B PrevWorkspace
Switch to the previous workspace.
.TP
.B ShowDesktop
Minimize all windows on the current workspace.
.SS Tab Actions
.TP
.B NextTab
Switch to the next tab in the focused tab group.
.TP
.B PrevTab
Switch to the previous tab.
.TP
.BI ActivateTab " N"
Activate tab number
.I N
(1-based).
.TP
.B DetachClient
Detach the focused window from its tab group.
.TP
.B MoveTabLeft
Move the current tab one position to the left.
.TP
.B MoveTabRight
Move the current tab one position to the right.
.TP
.B StartTabbing
Initiate tab-drag mode (mouse binding).
.SS Menu Actions
.TP
.B RootMenu
Show the root menu at the current cursor position.
.TP
.B WindowMenu
Show the window menu at the current cursor position.
.TP
.B WindowList
Show a menu listing all windows across all workspaces.
.TP
.B HideMenus
Hide all visible menus.
.SS Keyboard Layout Actions
.TP
.B NextLayout
Switch to the next XKB keyboard layout.
.TP
.B PrevLayout
Switch to the previous XKB keyboard layout.
.SS Meta-Actions
.TP
.BI Exec " command"
Execute
.I command
via
.BR /bin/sh .
Aliases:
.BR ExecCommand ,
.BR Execute .
.TP
.BI MacroCmd " {cmd1} {cmd2} ..."
Execute multiple actions in sequence.
Each sub-command is enclosed in braces:
.PP
.RS 8
.nf
Mod4 Return :MacroCmd {Raise} {Focus} {Exec foot}
.fi
.RE
.TP
.BI ToggleCmd " {cmd1} {cmd2} ..."
Cycle through actions on each invocation.
The first press executes
.IR cmd1 ,
the second
.IR cmd2 ,
and so on, wrapping around.
.TP
.BI KeyMode " name"
Switch to the named keymode.
See the
.B KEYMODES
section above.
.SS Compositor Control
.TP
.B Reconfigure
Reload all configuration files.
.TP
.B Exit\fR, \fBQuit
Terminate the compositor.
.SH MOUSE BINDINGS
Mouse bindings use the same syntax but begin with a context prefix
instead of modifier+key.
Mouse bindings are parsed from the keys file but handled by the
mouse binding subsystem.
.PP
The general format is:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
.I Context
.RI [ Modifier " ...] " ButtonEvent " :" Action " [" argument ]
.fi
.RE
.SS Contexts
.TP
.B OnTitlebar
Window title bar.
.TP
.B OnDesktop
Root (empty desktop) area.
.TP
.B OnWindowBorder
Window border.
.TP
.B OnLeftGrip\fR, \fBOnRightGrip
Corner resize grips.
.SS Button Events
.TP
.B Mouse1\fR, \fBMouse2\fR, \fBMouse3
Button press events (left, middle, right).
.TP
.B Move1
Drag with button 1 held.
.TP
.B Double1
Double-click button 1.
.TP
.B Mouse4\fR, \fBMouse5
Scroll wheel up/down.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
# Launch terminal
Mod4 Return :Exec foot

# Close focused window
Mod4 Shift q :Close

# Workspace switching
Mod4 1 :Workspace 1
Mod4 2 :Workspace 2

# Move window by keyboard
Mod4 Left :MoveLeft 20
Mod4 Right :MoveRight 20

# Key chain
Mod4 x Mod4 t :Exec foot
Mod4 x Mod4 f :Exec firefox

# Mouse: titlebar click raises and focuses
OnTitlebar Mouse1 :MacroCmd {Raise} {Focus} {ActivateTab}
OnTitlebar Move1 :StartMoving
OnTitlebar Double1 :Shade

# Alt+click move/resize
Mod1 Mouse1 :MacroCmd {Raise} {Focus} {StartMoving}
Mod1 Mouse3 :MacroCmd {Raise} {Focus} {StartResizing NearestCorner}
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fluxland (1),
.BR fluxland-apps (5),
.BR fluxland-style (5),
.BR fluxland-menu (5)
