.TH FLUXLAND-STARTUP 5 "2026-03-03" "fluxland 1.1.0" "File Formats Manual"
.SH NAME
fluxland-startup \- autostart script for fluxland
.SH DESCRIPTION
The startup file is a shell script executed when
.BR fluxland (1)
starts.
It is used to launch applications, set wallpapers, configure displays,
or perform other initialization tasks.
.PP
By default, the file is located at
.I ~/.config/fluxland/startup
within the configuration directory.
.SH EXECUTION
The startup script runs after the compositor is fully initialized and
the Wayland socket is available.
The
.B WAYLAND_DISPLAY
environment variable is set before the script executes.
.PP
If the startup file has the executable permission bit set
.RB ( "chmod +x" ),
it is executed directly.
Otherwise, it is run via
.BR /bin/sh .
.PP
The script is launched using a double-fork mechanism: the compositor
does not wait for the script to exit and does not manage its child
processes.
Long-running programs started from the script are inherited by the
init process.
.PP
In addition to the startup file, a command can be passed via the
.B \-s
option on the
.BR fluxland (1)
command line.
Both the startup file and the
.B \-s
command are executed.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables are available to the startup script:
.TP
.B WAYLAND_DISPLAY
The name of the Wayland socket (e.g.\&
.IR wayland-0 ).
.TP
.B FLUXLAND_SOCK
Path to the IPC socket for
.BR fluxland-ctl (1).
.TP
.B XDG_RUNTIME_DIR
The XDG runtime directory.
.SH EXAMPLES
Simple startup script:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
#!/bin/sh
# Set wallpaper
swaybg -i ~/wallpaper.png -m fill &

# Start notification daemon
mako &

# Launch a terminal
foot &
.fi
.RE
.PP
Startup script with display configuration:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
#!/bin/sh
# Configure displays
wlr-randr --output HDMI-A-1 --pos 0,0 \\
           --output eDP-1 --pos 1920,0

# Set wallpaper
swaybg -i ~/wallpaper.png -m fill &

# Start panel and notification daemon
waybar &
mako &
.fi
.RE
.PP
Make the script executable:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
chmod +x ~/.config/fluxland/startup
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/fluxland/startup
Default startup script location.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fluxland (1),
.BR fluxland-init (5)
