.TH FLUXLAND-CTL 1 "2026-02-27" "fluxland 1.0.0" "General Commands Manual"
.SH NAME
fluxland-ctl \- command-line IPC client for fluxland
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fluxland-ctl
.RB [ \-s
.IR socket ]
.RB [ \-r ]
.IR command " [" args... ]
.br
.B fluxland-ctl
.B \-h
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B fluxland-ctl
is a command-line tool for communicating with a running
.BR fluxland (1)
compositor via its IPC socket.
It can execute compositor actions, query window and workspace state,
subscribe to events, and more.
.PP
The tool connects to the compositor's Unix domain socket, sends a
JSON-encoded command, and prints the JSON response.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-s " socket"
Path to the IPC socket.
By default,
.B fluxland-ctl
auto-detects the socket by checking
.B $FLUXLAND_SOCK
and then trying
.IR $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/fluxland.$WAYLAND_DISPLAY.sock .
.TP
.B \-r
Raw output mode (no pretty printing).
This is currently the default.
.TP
.B \-h
Print usage information and exit.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.BI action " name" " [" argument ]
Execute a compositor action on the focused window.
The action name is case-insensitive.
See the
.B ACTIONS
section below for available actions.
Alias:
.BR command .
.TP
.B get_windows
List all managed windows as a JSON array.
Each entry includes the window ID, title, app_id, workspace,
geometry, and state flags (maximized, minimized, fullscreen,
sticky, shaded).
.TP
.B get_workspaces
List all workspaces as a JSON array with names, window counts,
and the currently active workspace index.
.TP
.B get_outputs
List all outputs (monitors) as a JSON array with names,
geometry, scale, and refresh rate.
.TP
.B get_config
Dump the current compositor configuration as a JSON object.
.TP
.BI subscribe " type" "[," type ]...
Subscribe to compositor events and print them as they occur.
The connection stays open and events are printed one JSON object
per line.
See the
.B EVENT TYPES
section for available types.
.TP
.B list-actions
Print all available action names and their descriptions.
This command does not require a running compositor.
.TP
.B ping
Test connectivity to the compositor.
Returns a success response if the compositor is reachable.
.SH ACTIONS
The following actions can be used with the
.B action
command.
Actions that operate on windows affect the currently focused window.
.SS Window Management
.TP
.BI "Exec " command
Execute a shell command.
.TP
.B Close
Close the focused window.
.TP
.B Kill
Force-kill the focused window's process.
.TP
.B Maximize
Toggle maximize.
.TP
.B MaximizeVertical
Toggle vertical maximize.
.TP
.B MaximizeHorizontal
Toggle horizontal maximize.
.TP
.B Fullscreen
Toggle fullscreen.
.TP
.BR Minimize ", " Iconify
Minimize (iconify) the focused window.
.TP
.B Deiconify
Restore the last minimized window.
.TP
.BR Shade ", " ShadeOn ", " ShadeOff
Toggle, enable, or disable window shading.
.TP
.B Stick
Toggle sticky (visible on all workspaces).
.TP
.B ToggleDecor
Toggle window decorations.
.TP
.BI "SetDecor " preset
Set decoration preset
.RB ( NORMAL ", " NONE ", " BORDER ", " TAB ", " TINY ", " TOOL ).
.SS Movement and Resizing
.TP
.BI "MoveLeft " pixels
Move the focused window left.
.TP
.BI "MoveRight " pixels
Move right.
.TP
.BI "MoveUp " pixels
Move up.
.TP
.BI "MoveDown " pixels
Move down.
.TP
.BI "MoveTo " "x y"
Move to absolute position.
.TP
.BI "ResizeTo " "width height"
Resize to the given dimensions.
.TP
.BI "ResizeHorizontal " pixels
Resize horizontally.
.TP
.BI "ResizeVertical " pixels
Resize vertically.
.TP
.BR LHalf ", " RHalf
Snap window to left or right half of the screen.
.SS Focus and Stacking
.TP
.BR FocusNext ", " NextWindow
Focus the next window.
.TP
.BR FocusPrev ", " PrevWindow
Focus the previous window.
.TP
.BR FocusLeft ", " FocusRight ", " FocusUp ", " FocusDown
Focus the nearest window in the given direction.
.TP
.B Raise
Raise the focused window.
.TP
.B Lower
Lower the focused window.
.TP
.BR RaiseLayer ", " LowerLayer
Move window up or down one stacking layer.
.TP
.BI "SetLayer " layer
Set the stacking layer explicitly.
.SS Workspaces
.TP
.BI "Workspace " N
Switch to workspace
.I N
(1-based).
.TP
.BI "SendToWorkspace " N
Send the focused window to workspace
.IR N .
.TP
.BI "TakeToWorkspace " N
Move with the focused window to workspace
.IR N .
.TP
.BR NextWorkspace ", " PrevWorkspace
Switch to the next or previous workspace.
.TP
.BR SendToNextWorkspace ", " SendToPrevWorkspace
Send the focused window to the next or previous workspace.
.TP
.BR TakeToNextWorkspace ", " TakeToPrevWorkspace
Move with the focused window to the next or previous workspace.
.TP
.BR AddWorkspace ", " RemoveLastWorkspace
Add a new workspace or remove the last empty workspace.
.TP
.B ShowDesktop
Minimize all windows on the current workspace.
.SS Tabs
.TP
.BR NextTab ", " PrevTab
Switch to the next or previous tab.
.TP
.BI "ActivateTab " N
Activate tab number
.IR N .
.TP
.B DetachClient
Detach the focused window from its tab group.
.TP
.BR MoveTabLeft ", " MoveTabRight
Reorder tabs.
.SS Window Arrangement
.TP
.B ArrangeWindows
Tile all windows in a grid.
.TP
.BR ArrangeWindowsVertical ", " ArrangeWindowsHorizontal
Tile in columns or rows.
.TP
.B ArrangeWindowsStackLeft\fR, \fBArrangeWindowsStackRight
Master-stack layout.
.TP
.B ArrangeWindowsStackTop\fR, \fBArrangeWindowsStackBottom
Master-stack layout (vertical).
.TP
.B CascadeWindows
Cascade windows diagonally.
.TP
.B CloseAllWindows
Close all windows on the current workspace.
.SS Menus
.TP
.BR RootMenu ", " WindowMenu ", " WindowList
Show the root menu, window menu, or window list menu.
.TP
.BR WorkspaceMenu ", " ClientMenu
Show the workspace or client menu.
.TP
.B HideMenus
Hide all open menus.
.SS Compositor Control
.TP
.B Reconfigure
Reload all configuration files.
.TP
.BR Exit ", " Quit
Terminate the compositor.
.SH EVENT TYPES
The following event type names are accepted by the
.B subscribe
command.
Multiple types can be specified as comma-separated or
space-separated values.
.TP
.B window
All window events (open, close, focus, title change).
Equivalent to subscribing to
.BR window_open ,
.BR window_close ,
.BR window_focus ,
and
.BR window_title .
.TP
.B window_open
A window was opened.
.TP
.B window_close
A window was closed.
.TP
.B window_focus
A window received focus.
.TP
.B window_title
A window's title changed.
.TP
.B workspace
The active workspace changed.
.TP
.B output
An output was added or removed.
.TP
.B style_changed
The style was changed.
.TP
.B config_reloaded
Configuration files were reloaded.
.TP
.B focus_changed
Focus changed (detailed, includes surface-level changes).
.TP
.B menu
A menu was opened or closed.
.TP
.B accessibility
Meta-subscription for accessibility tools.
Subscribes to
.BR focus_changed ,
.BR menu ,
.BR workspace ,
and
.BR window_focus .
.SH IPC PROTOCOL
The IPC protocol uses newline-delimited JSON over a Unix domain socket.
.PP
Requests have the form:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
{"command": "\fIname\fP", ...}\en
.fi
.RE
.PP
Responses have the form:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
{"success": true, "data": ...}\en
{"success": false, "error": "\fImessage\fP"}\en
.fi
.RE
.PP
Event notifications (for subscribed clients) are JSON objects with an
.B event
field:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
{"event": "window_open", "window": {...}}\en
.fi
.RE
.PP
The socket is authenticated using
.BR SO_PEERCRED ;
only connections from the same UID as the compositor are accepted.
.SH SOCKET DISCOVERY
.B fluxland-ctl
locates the IPC socket in this order:
.PP
.RS 4
1. The
.B \-s
command-line option.
.br
2. The
.B FLUXLAND_SOCK
environment variable (set automatically by the compositor for child
processes).
.br
3. Constructed from
.IR $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/fluxland.$WAYLAND_DISPLAY.sock .
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES
Close the focused window:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
fluxland-ctl action Close
.fi
.RE
.PP
Switch to workspace 3:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
fluxland-ctl action Workspace 3
.fi
.RE
.PP
Launch a terminal:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
fluxland-ctl action Exec foot
.fi
.RE
.PP
List all windows (JSON):
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
fluxland-ctl get_windows
.fi
.RE
.PP
Get the focused window title using jq:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
fluxland-ctl get_windows | jq '.[] | select(.focused) | .title'
.fi
.RE
.PP
Subscribe to window events:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
fluxland-ctl subscribe window
.fi
.RE
.PP
Subscribe to multiple event types:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
fluxland-ctl subscribe window,workspace,output
.fi
.RE
.PP
List available actions (no compositor needed):
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
fluxland-ctl list-actions
.fi
.RE
.PP
Connect to a specific socket:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
fluxland-ctl -s /run/user/1000/fluxland.wayland-1.sock get_windows
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Command executed successfully.
.TP
.B 1
An error occurred (connection failure, unknown command, etc.).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fluxland (1),
.BR fluxland-keys (5),
.BR fluxland-init (5)
