.TH FLUXLAND-STYLE 5 "2026-03-03" "fluxland 1.1.0" "File Formats Manual"
.SH NAME
fluxland-style \- style configuration for fluxland
.SH DESCRIPTION
Style files define the visual appearance of window decorations, menus,
and the toolbar in
.BR fluxland (1).
The format is compatible with Fluxbox style files, using X resource
database syntax (key: value pairs).
.PP
By default, the style is loaded from
.I ~/.config/fluxland/styles/default
but the path can be overridden in the init file via
.BR session.styleFile .
.PP
A style can be a single file or a directory containing a
.I theme.cfg
or
.I style.cfg
file.
Directory-based styles allow pixmap paths to be resolved relative to
the style directory.
.SH SYNTAX
Each line has the form:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
\fIresource.key\fP: \fIvalue\fP
.fi
.RE
.PP
Blank lines and lines beginning with
.B #
or
.B !
are comments.
Wildcard matching is supported: a key starting with
.B *
matches any prefix (e.g.\&
.B *.textColor
matches all text color resources).
.SH TEXTURE DESCRIPTIONS
Texture values are space-separated keywords:
.PP
.RS 4
.RI [ appearance "] [" fill "] [" gradient_type "] [" bevel "] [interlaced]"
.RE
.SS Appearance
.TP
.B Flat
No 3D effect.
.TP
.B Raised
Raised border effect (default).
.TP
.B Sunken
Sunken border effect.
.SS Fill Type
.TP
.B Solid
Single solid color.
.TP
.B Gradient
Two-color gradient.
.TP
.B Pixmap
Image file.
.TP
.B ParentRelative
Inherit from the parent element's texture.
.SS Gradient Types
.BR Horizontal ,
.BR Vertical ,
.BR Diagonal ,
.BR CrossDiagonal ,
.BR PipeCross ,
.BR Elliptic ,
.BR Rectangle ,
.BR Pyramid .
.SS Bevel
.TP
.B Bevel1
Standard bevel (default for raised/sunken).
.TP
.B Bevel2
Alternative bevel style.
.SS Additional
.TP
.B Interlaced
Apply an interlacing effect.
.PP
Example: \fBRaised Gradient Vertical Bevel1\fP
.SH COLOR FORMAT
Colors can be specified in several formats:
.TP
.B #RRGGBB
Hexadecimal RGB (e.g.\&
.IR #3465A4 ).
.TP
.B #RGB
Short hexadecimal (each digit is doubled).
.TP
.B rgb:R/G/B
Decimal or hexadecimal components (e.g.\&
.IR rgb:52/101/164 ).
.TP
.I named
The names
.BR white ,
.BR black ,
.BR red ,
.BR green ,
.BR blue ,
.BR grey ,
and
.B gray
are recognized.
.SH FONT FORMAT
Fonts are specified as:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
\fIfamily\fP\-\fIsize\fP[:\fIstyle\fP[:\fIstyle\fP]]
.fi
.RE
.PP
The
.I style
modifiers are
.B bold
and
.BR italic ,
separated by colons.
.PP
Examples:
.nf
    sans\-10
    monospace\-12:bold
    DejaVu Sans\-11:bold:italic
.fi
.PP
Each font resource also supports shadow properties:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
\fIfont_key\fP.shadow.x: \fIN\fP
\fIfont_key\fP.shadow.y: \fIN\fP
\fIfont_key\fP.shadow.color: \fIcolor\fP
.fi
.RE
.SH RESOURCES
.SS Window Title Bar
.TP
.B window.title.focus
Texture for the focused window title bar.
.TP
.B window.title.unfocus
Texture for unfocused windows.
.TP
.B window.title.height
Title bar height in pixels (0 = auto from font size).
.SS Window Label (Title Text Area)
.TP
.B window.label.focus
Texture for the focused label area.
.TP
.B window.label.unfocus
Unfocused label texture.
.TP
.B window.label.active
Active tab label texture (in tab groups).
.TP
.B window.label.focus.textColor
Focused label text color.
.TP
.B window.label.unfocus.textColor
Unfocused label text color.
.TP
.B window.label.active.textColor
Active tab label text color.
.TP
.B window.label.focus.font
Focused label font.
.TP
.B window.label.unfocus.font
Unfocused label font.
.TP
.B window.justify
Title text justification:
.BR Left " (default),"
.BR Center ,
or
.BR Right .
.SS Window Buttons
.TP
.B window.button.focus
Texture for focused window buttons.
.TP
.B window.button.unfocus
Unfocused button texture.
.TP
.B window.button.pressed
Pressed button texture.
.TP
.B window.button.focus.picColor
Icon color for focused buttons.
.TP
.B window.button.unfocus.picColor
Icon color for unfocused buttons.
.TP
.B window.button.pressed.picColor
Icon color for pressed buttons.
.PP
Per-button pixmaps can be specified for close, maximize, iconify, shade,
and stick buttons:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
window.close.pixmap: close.xpm
window.close.unfocus.pixmap: close_unfocus.xpm
window.close.pressed.pixmap: close_pressed.xpm
window.maximize.pixmap: max.xpm
window.iconify.pixmap: icon.xpm
window.shade.pixmap: shade.xpm
window.stick.pixmap: stick.xpm
.fi
.RE
.PP
Relative paths are resolved from the style directory.
.SS Window Handle and Grips
.TP
.B window.handle.focus
Focused handle (bottom bar) texture.
.TP
.B window.handle.unfocus
Unfocused handle texture.
.TP
.B window.handleWidth
Handle height in pixels (default: 6).
.TP
.B window.grip.focus
Focused corner grip texture.
.TP
.B window.grip.unfocus
Unfocused grip texture.
.SS Window Frame and Borders
.TP
.B window.frame.focusColor
Focused window frame color.
.TP
.B window.frame.unfocusColor
Unfocused frame color.
.TP
.B window.borderColor
Window border color.
.TP
.B window.borderWidth
Border width in pixels (default: 1).
.TP
.B window.bevelWidth
Bevel width in pixels (default: 1).
.TP
.B window.roundCorners
Rounded corners bitmask as a string containing any of:
.BR TopLeft ,
.BR TopRight ,
.BR BottomLeft ,
.BR BottomRight .
.SS Menu
.TP
.B menu.title
Menu title bar texture.
.TP
.B menu.title.textColor
Menu title text color.
.TP
.B menu.title.font
Menu title font.
.TP
.B menu.title.justify
Menu title justification
.RB ( Left ", " Center ", " Right ).
.TP
.B menu.frame
Menu items area texture.
.TP
.B menu.frame.textColor
Menu item text color.
.TP
.B menu.frame.font
Menu item font.
.TP
.B menu.hilite
Selection highlight texture.
.TP
.B menu.hilite.textColor
Selected item text color.
.TP
.B menu.borderColor
Menu border color.
.TP
.B menu.borderWidth
Menu border width (default: 1).
.SS Toolbar
.TP
.B toolbar
Toolbar background texture.
.TP
.B toolbar.textColor
Toolbar text color.
.TP
.B toolbar.font
Toolbar font.
.TP
.B toolbar.iconbar.focused.color
Background color for the focused window entry in the icon bar.
.TP
.B toolbar.iconbar.focused.textColor
Text color for the focused window entry.
.TP
.B toolbar.iconbar.unfocused.color
Background color for unfocused window entries.
.TP
.B toolbar.iconbar.unfocused.textColor
Text color for unfocused entries.
.SH TEXTURE COLORS
Each texture resource supports
.B .color
and
.B .colorTo
sub-keys for the primary and gradient-end colors:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
window.title.focus: Raised Gradient Vertical
window.title.focus.color: #3465A4
window.title.focus.colorTo: #204A87
.fi
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES
A simple dark style:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
# Window title
window.title.focus: Raised Gradient Vertical
window.title.focus.color: #333333
window.title.focus.colorTo: #222222
window.title.unfocus: Flat Solid
window.title.unfocus.color: #1a1a1a

# Label
window.label.focus.textColor: #e0e0e0
window.label.unfocus.textColor: #888888
window.label.focus.font: sans-10:bold
window.justify: Center

# Buttons
window.button.focus: Raised Solid
window.button.focus.color: #444444
window.button.focus.picColor: #ffffff
window.button.unfocus.picColor: #666666

# Borders
window.borderColor: #000000
window.borderWidth: 1
window.handleWidth: 4

# Menu
menu.title: Raised Gradient Vertical
menu.title.color: #3465A4
menu.title.colorTo: #204A87
menu.title.textColor: #ffffff
menu.frame: Flat Solid
menu.frame.color: #222222
menu.frame.textColor: #cccccc
menu.hilite: Flat Solid
menu.hilite.color: #3465A4
menu.hilite.textColor: #ffffff

# Toolbar
toolbar: Flat Solid
toolbar.color: #2e2e2e
toolbar.textColor: #e0e0e0
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fluxland (1),
.BR fluxland-keys (5),
.BR fluxland-apps (5),
.BR fluxland-menu (5)
