.TH WM-WAYLAND-APPS 5 "2026-02-10" "wm-wayland 0.1.0" "File Formats Manual"
.SH NAME
wm-wayland-apps \- per-window rules configuration for wm-wayland
.SH DESCRIPTION
The apps file defines per-window rules that are automatically applied
when windows are mapped.
The format is compatible with the Fluxbox apps file format.
.PP
By default, the file is located at
.I ~/.config/wm-wayland/apps
but the path can be overridden in the init file via
.BR session.appsFile .
.PP
The file contains two types of blocks:
.B [app]
blocks for window rules, and
.B [group]
blocks for automatic tab grouping.
.SH SYNTAX
Blank lines and lines beginning with
.B #
or
.B !
are ignored.
.SS Window Rule Blocks
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
[app] (\fIproperty\fP=\fIpattern\fP) [(\fIproperty\fP=\fIpattern\fP) ...]
  [\fISetting\fP] {\fIvalue\fP}
  ...
[end]
.fi
.RE
.PP
Multiple match patterns on the
.B [app]
line are AND-combined: all patterns must match for the rule to apply.
The first matching rule wins; subsequent rules are not evaluated.
.SS Group Blocks
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
[group] [(workspace)]
  [app] (\fIproperty\fP=\fIpattern\fP)
  [app] (\fIproperty\fP=\fIpattern\fP)
  ...
[end]
.fi
.RE
.PP
Group blocks define automatic tab grouping.
Windows matching any
.B [app]
pattern within a group block are grouped together into tabs.
The optional
.B (workspace)
modifier restricts grouping to windows on the same workspace.
.SH MATCH PROPERTIES
Patterns use POSIX extended regular expressions.
.TP
.B class
Matches the XDG toplevel
.IR app_id .
.TP
.B name
Alias for
.BR class .
.TP
.B title
Matches the window title.
.TP
.B transient
Matches
.B yes
or
.B no
based on whether the window is a transient (child) window.
.PP
Negated matching is supported with
.BR != :
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
[app] (class!=firefox)
.fi
.RE
.SH SETTINGS
Settings are placed inside
.B [app]
blocks, one per line.
Each setting has the form
.BI [ Name "] {" value }
with an optional modifier in parentheses.
.TP
.BI [Workspace] " {" N }
Open the window on workspace
.I N
(0-based).
.TP
.BI [Dimensions] " {" "W H" }
Set initial window size to
.I W
by
.I H
pixels.
.TP
.BI [Position] " (" anchor ") {" "X Y" }
Set initial position.
The optional
.I anchor
is one of
.BR Center ,
.BR UpperLeft ,
.BR UpperRight ,
.BR LowerLeft ,
or
.BR LowerRight .
The coordinates are relative to the anchor point.
.TP
.BI [Deco] " {" preset }
Set decoration preset:
.BR NORMAL " (full decorations),"
.BR NONE " (no decorations),"
.BR BORDER " (border only),"
.BR TAB " (tab only),"
.BR TINY " (minimal),"
or
.BR TOOL " (tool window)."
.TP
.BI [Sticky] " {" yes | no }
Visible on all workspaces.
.TP
.BI [Layer] " {" N }
Stacking layer number.
.TP
.BI [Alpha] " {" "focus [unfocus]" }
Window opacity (0\-255).
If only one value is given, it is used for both focused and unfocused states.
.TP
.BI [Maximized] " {" yes | no }
Start maximized.
.TP
.BI [Minimized] " {" yes | no }
Start minimized.
.TP
.BI [Fullscreen] " {" yes | no }
Start fullscreen.
.TP
.BI [Shaded] " {" yes | no }
Start shaded (title bar only).
.TP
.BI [FocusNewWindow] " {" yes | no }
Whether the window receives focus when opened.
.TP
.BI [Head] " {" N }
Open on monitor number
.IR N .
.SH EXAMPLES
Open Firefox on workspace 2:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
[app] (class=firefox)
  [Workspace] {2}
[end]
.fi
.RE
.PP
Make mpv borderless and fullscreen:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
[app] (class=mpv)
  [Deco] {NONE}
  [Fullscreen] {yes}
[end]
.fi
.RE
.PP
Center new dialog windows:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
[app] (transient=yes)
  [Position] (Center) {0 0}
[end]
.fi
.RE
.PP
Set terminal emulator opacity:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
[app] (class=foot)
  [Alpha] {230 200}
[end]
.fi
.RE
.PP
Auto-group terminal emulators into tabs (same workspace only):
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
[group] (workspace)
  [app] (class=foot)
  [app] (class=Alacritty)
  [app] (class=kitty)
[end]
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR wm-wayland (1),
.BR wm-wayland-keys (5),
.BR wm-wayland-style (5),
.BR wm-wayland-menu (5),
.BR regex (7)
